doc: Add IPC service documentation (#51443)
zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr: doc/services/ipc/ipc_service/ipc_service.rst

.. _ipc_service:

IPC service
###########

.. contents::
    :local:
    :depth: 2

> The IPC service API provides an interface to exchange the data between two
> domains/CPUs. It must be ensured that receiving domain/CPU is aware that the
> data has arrived.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The IPC service API provides an interface to exchange data between two
domains or CPUs. It must be ensured that the receiving domain (or CPU) is aware that the
data has arrived.
```

An IPC service communication channel consists of one instance and one or
several endpoints associated with the instance.

An instance is the external representation of a physical communication channel
between two domains/CPUs. The actual implementation and internal representation
of the instance is peculiar to each backend.

An individual instance is not used to send data between domains/CPUs. To send
and receive the data, the user must create (register) an endpoint in the

> instance. This allows to connect two domains of interest.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
instance. This allows for the connection of the two domains of interest.
```

> It's possible to have zero or multiple endpoints for one single instance
> possibly with different priorities and each one is used to exchange data.
> Endpoint prioritization and multi instance ability highly depend on the backend
> used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is possible to have zero or multiple endpoints for one single instance,
possibly with different priorities, and to use each one to exchange data.
Endpoint prioritization and multi instance ability highly depend on the backend
used.
```

The endpoint is an entity the user must use to send and receive data between
two domains (connected by the instance). An endpoint is always associated to an
instance.

The creation of the instances is left to the backend - usually at init time.

> Registration of the endpoints is left to the user - usually at run time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The registration of the endpoints is left to the user - usually at run time.
```

The API does not mandate a way for the backend to create instances but it is

> strongly recommended to use the DT to retrieve the configuration parameters for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
strongly recommended to use devicetree to retrieve the configuration parameters for
```

> an instance. Currently each backend define its own DT compatible that is used

Reviewer: ```suggestion
an instance. Currently, each backend defines its own DT-compatible configuration that is used
```

It feels like a word is missing here

> to configure interface at boot time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to configure the interface at boot time.
```

Usage
*****

Simple data exchange
====================

> In order to send data between domains/CPUs an endpoint must be registered onto

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To send data between domains or CPUs, an endpoint must be registered onto
```

> an instance. Note that before registering an endpoint, instance must be opened
> with :c:func:`ipc_service_open_instance` function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
an instance. 

.. note::
   Before registering an endpoint, the instance must be opened
   using the :c:func:`ipc_service_open_instance` function.
```

.. code-block:: c

   #include <zephyr/include/ipc_service.h>

   static void bound_cb(void *priv)
   {
      /* Endpint bounded */
   }

   static void recv_cb(const void *data, size_t len, void *priv)
   {
      /* Data received */
   }

   static struct ipc_ept_cfg ept0_cfg = {
      .name = "ept0",
      .cb = {
         .bound    = bound_cb,
         .received = recv_cb,
      },
   };

   int main(void)
   {
      const struct device *inst0;
      struct ipc_ept ept0;
      int ret;

      inst0 = DEVICE_DT_GET(DT_NODELABEL(ipc0));
      ret = ipc_service_open_instance(inst0);
      ret = ipc_service_register_endpoint(inst0, &ept0, &ept0_cfg);

      /* Wait for endpint bound (bound_cb called) */

      unsigned char message[] = "hello world";
      ret = ipc_service_send(&ept0, &message, sizeof(message));
   }

Data exchange with no copy API
==============================

> If the backend supports no copy API you can use it to directly write and read
> to and from shared memory regions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the backend supports the no-copy API you can use it to directly write and read
to and from shared memory regions.
```

   #include <stdint.h>
   #include <string.h>

   static struct ipc_ept ept0;

   static void bound_cb(void *priv)
   {
      /* Endpint bounded */
   }

   static void recv_cb_nocopy(const void *data, size_t len, void *priv)
   {
      int ret;

      ret = ipc_service_hold_rx_buffer(&ept0, (void *)data);
      /* Process directly or put the buffer somewhere else and release. */
      ret = ipc_service_release_rx_buffer(&ept0, (void *)data);
   }

   static struct ipc_ept_cfg ept0_cfg = {
      .name = "ept0",
      .cb = {
         .bound    = bound_cb,
         .received = recv_cb,
      },
   };

   int main(void)
   {
      const struct device *inst0;
      int ret;

      inst0 = DEVICE_DT_GET(DT_NODELABEL(ipc0));
      ret = ipc_service_open_instance(inst0);
      ret = ipc_service_register_endpoint(inst0, &ept0, &ept0_cfg);

      /* Wait for endpint bound (bound_cb called) */
      void *data;
      unsigned char message[] = "hello world";
      uint32_t len = sizeof(message);

      ret = ipc_service_get_tx_buffer(&ept0, &data, &len, K_FOREVER);

      memcpy(data, message, len);

      ret = ipc_service_send_nocopy(&ept0, data, sizeof(message));
   }

Backends
********

> The IPC service is flexible thanks to little requirements to the backend
> implementation. This allows to add dedicated backend with subset of important

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The requirements to the backend implementation give flexibility to the IPC service.
This allows for the addition of dedicated backends having only a subsets of important
```

> features for a specific use case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
features for specific use cases.
```

> The backend must take care of at least 2 core things:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The backend must support at least the following:
```

- Creating instances at init time.
- Support registering the endpoint onto an instance at run time.

> Additionally backend can:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, the backend can also support the following:
```

> - Support run time deregistration of an endpoint from the instance.
> - Support run time closing an instance.
> - Support no copy API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The runtime deregistration of an endpoint from the instance.
- The runtime closing of an instance.
- The no-copy API.
```

> Each backend can have its own limitations and features that make backend unique
> and dedicated to a specific use case. IPC service API can be used with multiple
> backends simultaneously combining pros and cons of each backend.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each backend can have its own limitations and features that make the backend unique
and dedicated to a specific use case. The IPC service API can be used with multiple
backends simultaneously, combining the pros and cons of each backend.
```

.. _ipc_service:

IPC service
###########

.. contents::
    :local:
    :depth: 2

The IPC service API provides an interface to exchange data between two domains
or CPUs. It must be ensured that the receiving domain (or CPU) is aware that

> the data has arrived.

Reviewer: Is this a requirement? @emob-nordic

Author: It might sound too hard. We currently use mbox for pinging, but this is specific to a backend.. I will remove this sentence. It's not applicable for every backend we can imagine.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Overview
========

```

An IPC service communication channel consists of one instance and one or
several endpoints associated with the instance.

An instance is the external representation of a physical communication channel

> between two domains/CPUs. The actual implementation and internal representation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
between two domains or CPUs. The actual implementation and internal representation
```

of the instance is peculiar to each backend.

An individual instance is not used to send data between domains/CPUs. To send
and receive the data, the user must create (register) an endpoint in the
instance. This allows for the connection of the two domains of interest.

It is possible to have zero or multiple endpoints for one single instance,
possibly with different priorities, and to use each to exchange data.

> Endpoint prioritization and multi instance ability highly depend on the backend

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Endpoint prioritization and multi-instance ability highly depend on the backend
```

used.

The endpoint is an entity the user must use to send and receive data between
two domains (connected by the instance). An endpoint is always associated to an
instance.

> The creation of the instances is left to the backend - usually at init time.
> The registration of the endpoints is left to the user - usually at run time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The creation of the instances is left to the backend, usually at init time.
The registration of the endpoints is left to the user, usually at run time.
```

The API does not mandate a way for the backend to create instances but it is
strongly recommended to use the devicetree to retrieve the configuration

> parameters for an instance. Currently each backend defines its own

Reviewer: ```suggestion
parameters for an instance. Currently, each backend defines its own
```

DT-compatible configuration that is used to configure the interface at boot
time.

Usage
*****

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The following usage scenarios are supported:

* Simple data exchange
* Data exchange using the no-copy API

```

Simple data exchange
====================

To send data between domains or CPUs, an endpoint must be registered onto
an instance.

.. note::

>    Before registering an endpoint, the instance must be opened using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Before registering an endpoint, the instance must be opened using the
```

   :c:func:`ipc_service_open_instance` function.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See the following example:

```

.. code-block:: c

   #include <zephyr/include/ipc_service.h>

   static void bound_cb(void *priv)
   {
      /* Endpint bounded */
   }

   static void recv_cb(const void *data, size_t len, void *priv)
   {
      /* Data received */
   }

   static struct ipc_ept_cfg ept0_cfg = {
      .name = "ept0",
      .cb = {
         .bound    = bound_cb,
         .received = recv_cb,
      },
   };

   int main(void)
   {
      const struct device *inst0;
      struct ipc_ept ept0;
      int ret;

      inst0 = DEVICE_DT_GET(DT_NODELABEL(ipc0));
      ret = ipc_service_open_instance(inst0);
      ret = ipc_service_register_endpoint(inst0, &ept0, &ept0_cfg);

      /* Wait for endpint bound (bound_cb called) */

      unsigned char message[] = "hello world";
      ret = ipc_service_send(&ept0, &message, sizeof(message));
   }

> Data exchange with no copy API
> ==============================

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Data exchange using the no-copy API
===================================
```

If the backend supports the no-copy API you can use it to directly write and
read to and from shared memory regions.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

See the following example:

```

   #include <stdint.h>
   #include <string.h>

   static struct ipc_ept ept0;

   static void bound_cb(void *priv)
   {
      /* Endpint bounded */
   }

   static void recv_cb_nocopy(const void *data, size_t len, void *priv)
   {
      int ret;

      ret = ipc_service_hold_rx_buffer(&ept0, (void *)data);
      /* Process directly or put the buffer somewhere else and release. */
      ret = ipc_service_release_rx_buffer(&ept0, (void *)data);
   }

   static struct ipc_ept_cfg ept0_cfg = {
      .name = "ept0",
      .cb = {
         .bound    = bound_cb,
         .received = recv_cb,
      },
   };

   int main(void)
   {
      const struct device *inst0;
      int ret;

      inst0 = DEVICE_DT_GET(DT_NODELABEL(ipc0));
      ret = ipc_service_open_instance(inst0);
      ret = ipc_service_register_endpoint(inst0, &ept0, &ept0_cfg);

      /* Wait for endpint bound (bound_cb called) */
      void *data;
      unsigned char message[] = "hello world";
      uint32_t len = sizeof(message);

      ret = ipc_service_get_tx_buffer(&ept0, &data, &len, K_FOREVER);

      memcpy(data, message, len);

      ret = ipc_service_send_nocopy(&ept0, data, sizeof(message));
   }

Backends
********

> The requirements to the backend implementation give flexibility to the IPC
> service. This allows for the addition of dedicated backends having only a
> subsets of features for specific use cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The requirements needed for implementing backends give flexibility to the IPC
service. These allow for the addition of dedicated backends having only a
subsets of features for specific use cases.
```

The backend must support at least the following:

> - Creating instances at init time.
> - The run time registeration of the endpoint in an instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The init-time creation of instances.
* The run-time registration of an endpoint in an instance.
```

Additionally, the backend can also support the following:

> - The run time deregistration of an endpoint from the instance.
> - The run time closing of an instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The run-time deregistration of an endpoint from the instance.
- The run-time closing of an instance.
```

.. _ipc_service:

IPC service
###########

.. contents::
    :local:
    :depth: 2

The IPC service API provides an interface to exchange the data between two
domains/CPUs. Messages are exchanged between the domains through a shared

> memory region. Domains signal to each other data has been written with use of
> IPM devices.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
memory region. Domains signal to each other data has been sent (or received) with use of
IPM / MBOX devices.
```

> IPC service communication channel consist of the instance and the endpoint
> associated with an instance. An instance is the external representation of a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An IPC service communication channel consists of one instance and one or several endpoints
associated with the instance.

An instance is the external representation of a
```

physical communication channel between two domains/CPUs. The actual
implementation and internal representation of the instance is peculiar to each
backend.

> An individual instance is not used to send data between domains/CPUs. To send
> and receive the data, the user have to create (register) an endpoint in the
> instance. This allows to connect two domains of interest.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An individual instance is not used to send data between domains/CPUs. To send
and receive the data, the user must create (register) an endpoint in the
instance. This allows to connect two domains of interest.
```

> It's possible to have zero or multiple endpoints in one single instance, each
> one is used to exchange data. Possibly with different priorities. Endpoint
> prioritization and multi instance ability highly depends on the backend used.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It's possible to have zero or multiple endpoints for one single instance possibly with different priorities and each
one is used to exchange data. Endpoint
prioritization and multi instance ability highly depend on the backend used.
```

The creation of the instances is left to the backend - usually at init time.
Registration of the endpoints is left to the user - usually at run time.

The API does not mandate a way for the backend to create instances but it is
strongly recommended to use the DT to retrieve the configuration parameters for
an instance. Currently each backend define its own DT compatible that is used
to configure interface at boot time.

The endpoint is an entity the user must use to send and receive data between
two domains (connected by the instance). An endpoint is always associated to an

> instance.

Reviewer 2: Move this up when talking about endpoints.

Usage
*****

Simple data exchange
====================

In order to send data between domains/CPUs an endpoint must be registered onto
an instance. Note that it is up to the backend if before registering an
endpoint instance must be opened with :c:func:`ipc_service_open_instance`

> function.

Reviewer 2: uhm, this is a bit controversial. The user must always call `ipc_service_open_instance()`, it's not really dependent on the backend implementation.

Author: There might be some misunderstanding from my side. In fact in we have:
```
int ipc_service_open_instance(const struct device *instance)
{
	const struct ipc_service_backend *backend;
        [...]
	backend = (const struct ipc_service_backend *) instance->api;
        [...]
	if (!backend->open_instance) {
		/* maybe not needed on backend */
		return 0;
	}
```

In fact you can live without calling it. But i understand that we should always do it for the sake of consistency.

Reviewer 2: yeah, the idea is that you want to always have that so you don't have to think which backend you are using and adapting your code.

Author: You are right. I will rephrase this sentence.

      memcpy(data, message, len);

      ret = ipc_service_send_nocopy(&ept0, data, sizeof(message));
   }

Backends
********

The IPC service is flexible thanks to little requirements to the backend
implementation. This allows to add dedicated backend with subset of important
features for a specific use case.

The backend must take care of at least 2 core things:

- Creating instances at init time.
- Support registering the endpoint onto an instance at run time.

Additionally backend can:

- Support run time deregistration of an endpoint from the instance.
- Support run time closing an instance.
- Support no copy API.

Each backend can have its own limitations and features that make backend unique
and dedicated to a specific use case. IPC service API can be used with multiple
backends simultaneously combining pros and cons of each backend.

ICMsg backend
=============

Inter core messaging backend (ICMsg) was created as a counter proposal to
heavier RPMsg static vrings backend. It offers limitted features, but it small
in size at the same time. It supports minimal functionalities to have the least
possible memory footprint. ICMsg backend is build on top of :ref:`spsc_pbuf`.

> ICMsg backend support registration of single endpoint on single instance. If

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
ICMsg backend supports registration of single endpoint on single instance. If
```

application requires more than one communication channel, multiple instances
must be defined. On each instance dedicated endpoint must be created.

Bonding
-------

When endpoint is registered magic number is written to the shared memory and

> signal is send to other domain/CPU. After that, attempt to read the magic

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
signal is sent to other domain/CPU. After that attempt to read the magic
```

.. _ipc_service:

IPC service
###########

.. contents::
    :local:
    :depth: 2

The IPC service API provides an interface to exchange the data between two
domains/CPUs. Messages are exchanged between the domains through a shared
memory region. Domains signal to each other data has been sent (or received)
with use of IPM/MBOX devices.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```
Messages are exchanged between the domains through a shared
memory region. Domains signal to each other data has been sent (or received)
with use of IPM/MBOX devices
```
This seems to me to be an assumption about the implementation of the backend.
For instance I don't see a limitation to use the IPC service for communication between two SoCs using an UART backend.

Perhaps be more generic at this level speaking about mechanism to exchange data and to signaling to inform about the message transfer.

Author: Afaik that was the intention of ipc service in the first place. It supports communication based on shared memory. Isn't that the case @carlocaione ?
I understand your point and i agree that technically there is a possibility to add uart backend.

Reviewer 2: @emob-nordic can you make that statement a bit more generic to accommodate for other implementations that do not use IPM/MBOX as well? I kinda agree with @arnopo here

Author: @carlocaione yes, sure. I agree with that point. Thanks for noticing @arnopo

Author: What do you think about:
```
The IPC service API provides an interface to exchange the data between two
domains/CPUs. The data exchange is signaled between the domains after they are
sent.
```

Reviewer 2: I would just remove the `The data exchange is signaled between the domains after they are
sent.` part. If that's done then the backend part would specify that.

Author: Sorry i removed the comment as i found what i wrote was silly. I pushed a change - i hope it's generic enough.

An IPC service communication channel consists of one instance and one or
several endpoints associated with the instance.

An instance is the external representation of a physical communication channel
between two domains/CPUs. The actual implementation and internal representation
of the instance is peculiar to each backend.

An individual instance is not used to send data between domains/CPUs. To send
and receive the data, the user must create (register) an endpoint in the
instance. This allows to connect two domains of interest.

It's possible to have zero or multiple endpoints for one single instance

> possilby with different priorities and each one is used to exchange data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
possibly with different priorities and each one is used to exchange data.
```

   #include <stdint.h>
   #include <string.h>

   static struct ipc_ept ept0;

   static void bound_cb(void *priv)
   {
      /* Endpint bounded */
   }

   static void recv_cb_nocopy(const void *data, size_t len, void *priv)
   {
      int ret;

      ret = ipc_service_hold_rx_buffer(&ept0, (void *)data);
      /* Process directly or put the buffer somewhere else and release. */
      ret = ipc_service_release_rx_buffer(&ept0, (void *)data);
   }

   static struct ipc_ept_cfg ept0_cfg = {
      .name = "ept0",
      .cb = {
         .bound    = bound_cb,
         .received = recv_cb,
      },
   };

   int main(void)
   {
      const struct device *inst0;
      int ret;

      inst0 = DEVICE_DT_GET(DT_NODELABEL(ipc0));
      ret = ipc_service_open_instance(inst0);
      ret = ipc_service_register_endpoint(inst0, &ept0, &ept0_cfg);

      /* Wait for endpint bound (bound_cb called) */
      void *data;
      unsigned char message[] = "hello world";
      uint32_t len = sizeof(message);

      ret = ipc_service_get_tx_buffer(&ept0, &data, &len, K_FOREVER);

      memcpy(data, message, len);

      ret = ipc_service_send_nocopy(&ept0, data, sizeof(message));
   }

Backends

> ********

Reviewer 3: I will move this in a separate file (to have one documentation file per backend) and just list here the backends with the reference to the associated .rst  file
Otherwise, the file could become very large after describing all the backends and potentially adding new ones.

Reviewer 3: sorry my comment is not well placed consider it for the` ICMsg backend `folder

Author: Okay. Will do

features for a specific use case.

The backend must take care of at least 2 core things:

- Creating instances at init time.
- Support registering the endpoint onto an instance at run time.

Additionally backend can:

- Support run time deregistration of an endpoint from the instance.
- Support run time closing an instance.
- Support no copy API.

Each backend can have its own limitations and features that make backend unique
and dedicated to a specific use case. IPC service API can be used with multiple
backends simultaneously combining pros and cons of each backend.

ICMsg backend
=============

Inter core messaging backend (ICMsg) was created as a counter proposal to
heavier RPMsg static vrings backend. It offers limitted features, but it small
in size at the same time. It supports minimal functionalities to have the least
possible memory footprint. ICMsg backend is build on top of :ref:`spsc_pbuf`.

ICMsg backend supports registration of single endpoint on single instance. If
application requires more than one communication channel, multiple instances
must be defined. On each instance dedicated endpoint must be created.

Bonding
-------

> When endpoint is registered magic number is written to the shared memory and
> signal is sent to other domain/CPU. After that attempt to read the magic

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the endpoint is registered, a magic number is written to the shared memory and a
signal is sent to other domain/CPU. After that attempt to read the magic
```

number from the other side of the communication is done. If the magic number is
already there it means that the other communication side has already registered
endpoint on its side and bound callback is called. If there is no magic number
yet, the endpoint waits to receive signal from the other domain/CPU to read the
magic number.

> Because ICMsg backend performs first read regargless of the signaling mechanism

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because ICMsg backend performs first read regardless of the signaling mechanism
```

it is required from the user that shared memory areas are cleared with zeroes
before any side of the communication uses it.

Configuration
-------------

Backend configuration is done via DT. This ensures the memory region is unique
and not ovrlapping. The user must take care of picking the correct area and
reserve it for IPC service with ICMsg backend. An example configuration is
shown below.

.. code-block:: devicetree

   reserved-memory {
      tx: memory@20070000 {
         reg = <0x20070000 0x0800>;
      };

      rx: memory@20078000 {
         reg = <0x20078000 0x0800>;
      };
   };

      ipc {
         ipc0: ipc0 {
            compatible = "zephyr,ipc-icmsg";
            tx-region = <&tx>;
            rx-region = <&rx>;
            mboxes = <&mbox 0>, <&mbox 1>;
            mbox-names = "tx", "rx";
            status = "okay";
         };
      };
   };

Similar configuration must be provided for the other side of the communication

> (domain/CPU) mbox channels tx and rx regions swapped.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(domain/CPU) but the MBOX channels (TX and RX) are swapped.
```

.. TODO: rpmsg static vrings backend doc

Samples
*******

 - :ref:`ipc_icmsg_sample`

>  - :ref:`static_vrings_sample`

Reviewer 3: suggestions: to add subfolders to list sample(s)  per backend
